Ladies and Gentlemen, I cordially thank you, with the utmost sincerity, for the honour you have conferred upon me — the greatest honour that it is possible for this Sovereign Assembly to confer — by electing me as your first President. I also thank those leaders who have spoken in appreciation of my services and their personal references to me. I sincerely hope that with your support and your co-operation we shall make this Constituent Assembly an example to the world. The Constituent Assembly has got two main functions to perform. The first is the very onerous and responsible task of framing our future constitution of Pakistan and the second of functioning as a full and complete Sovereign body as the Federal Legislature of Pakistan. We have to do the best we can in adopting a provisional constitution for the Federal Legislature of Pakistan. You know really that not only we ourselves are wondering but, I think, the whole world is wondering at this unprecedented cyclonic revolution which has brought about the plan of creating and establishing two independent Sovereign Dominions in this sub-continent. As it is, it has been unprecedented; there is no parallel in the history of the world. This mighty sub-continent with all kinds of inhabitants has been brought under a plan which is titanic, unknown, unparalleled. And what is very important with regards to it is that we have achieved it peacefully and by means of a revolution of the greatest possible character.
Dealing with our first function in this Assembly, I cannot make any well-considered pronouncement at this moment, but I shall say a few things as they occur to me. The first and the foremost thing that I would like to emphasise is this — remember that you are now a Sovereign legislative body and you have got all the powers. It, therefore, places on you the gravest responsibility as to how you should take your decisions. The first observation that I would like to make is this. You will no doubt agree with me that the first duty of a Government is to maintain law and order, so that the life, property and religious beliefs of its subjects are fully protected by the State.
The second thing that occurs to me is this. One of the biggest curses from which India is suffering — I do not say that other countries are free from it, but, I think, our condition is much worse — is bribery and corruption. (Hear, hear.) That really is a poison. We must put that down with an iron hand and I hope that you will take adequate measures as soon as it is possible for this Assembly to do so.
Black-marketing is another curse. Well, I know that black-marketers are frequently caught and punished. According to our judicial notions sentences are passed, and sometimes fines only are imposed. Now you have to tackle this monster which today is a colossal crime against society, in our distressed conditions, when we constantly face shortage of food and or the essential commodities of life. A citizen who does black-marketing commits, I think, a greater crime than the biggest and most grievous of crimes. These black-marketers are really knowing, intelligent and ordinarily responsible people, and when they indulge in black-marketing, I think they ought to be very severely punished, because they undermine the entire system of control and regulation of food-stuffs and essential commodities, and cause wholesale starvation and want and even death.
The next thing that strikes me is this. Here again is a legacy which has been passed on to us. Along with many other things good and bad, has arrived this great evil -the evil of nepotism and jobbery. This evil must be crushed relentlessly. I want to make it quite clear that I shall never tolerate any kind of jobbery, nepotism or any influence directly or indirectly brought to bear upon me. Wherever I find that such a practice is in vogue, or is continuing anywhere, low or high, I shall certainly not countenance it.
I know there are people who do not quite agree with the division of Indian and the partition of the Punjab and Bengal. Much has been said against it, but now that it has been accepted, it is the duty of every one of us to loyally abide by it and honourably act according to the agreement which is now final and binding on all. But you must remember, as I have said, that this mighty revolution that has taken place is unprecedented. One can quite understand the feeling that exists between the two communities wherever one community is in majority and the other is in minority. But the question is whether it was possible or practicable to act otherwise than has been done. A division had to take place. On both sides, in Hindustan and Pakistan, there are sections of people who may not agree with it, who may not like it, but in my judgment there was no other solution and I am sure future history will record its verdict in favour of it. And what is more it will be proved by actual experience as we go on that that was the only solution of India’s constitutional problem. Any idea of a United India could never have worked and in my judgment it would have led us to terrific disaster. May be that view is correct; may be it is not; that remains to be seen. All the same, in this division it was impossible to avoid the questions of minorities being in one Dominion or the other. Now that was unavoidable. There is no other solution. Now what shall we do? Now, if we want to make this great State of Pakistan happy and prosperous we should wholly and solely concentrate on the well-being of the people, and especially of the masses and the poor. If you will work in co-operation, forgetting the past, burying the hatchet, you are bound to succeed. If you change your past and work together in a spirit that every one of you, no matter to what community he belongs, no matter to what community he belongs, no matter what relations he had with you in the past, no matter what is his colour, caste or creed, is first, second and last a citizen of this State with equal rights, privileges and obligations there will be no end to the progress you will make.
I cannot emphasise it too much. We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these angularities of the majority and minority communities — the Hindu community and the Muslim community — because even as regards Muslims you have Pathans, Punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have Brahmins, Vashnavas, Khatris, also Bengalese, Madrasis and so on — will vanish. Indeed if you ask me this has been the biggest hindrance in the way of India to attain its freedom and independence and but for this we would have been free peoples long long ago. No power can hold another nation, and specially a nation of 400 millions souls in subjection; no body could have conquered you, and even if it had happened, no body could have continued its hold on you for any length of time but for this. (Applause.) Therefore we must learn a lesson from this. You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other places of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or creed — that has nothing to do with the business of the State (Hear, hear). As you know, history shows that in England conditions some time ago were much worse than those prevailing in India to-day. The Roman Catholics and the Protestants persecuted each other. Even now there are some States in existence where there are discriminations made and bars imposed against a particular class. Thank God we are not starting in those days. We are starting in the days when there is no discrimination, no distinction between one community and another, no discrimination between one caste or creed and another. We are starting with this fundamental principle that we are all citizens and equal citizens of one State. (Loud applause.) The people of England in course of time had to face the realities of the situation and had to discharge the responsibilities and burdens placed upon them by the government of their country and they went through that fire step by step. Today you might say with justice that Roman Catholics and Protestants do not exist: what exists now is that every man is a citizen, an equal citizen, of Great Britain and they are all members of the nation.
Now, I think we should keep that in front of us as our ideal and you will find that in course of time Hindus would cease to be Hindus and Muslims would cease to be Muslims, not in the religious sense, because that is the personal faith of each individual, but in the political sense as citizens of the State.
Well, gentlemen, I do not wish to take up any more of your time and thank you again for the honour you have done to me. I shall always be guided by the principles of justice and fair-play without any, as is put in the political language, prejudice or ill-will, in other words partiality or favouritism. My guiding principle will be justice and complete impartiality, and I am sure that with your support and co-operation, I can look forward to Pakistan becoming one of the greatest Nations of the world. (Loud applause)
We are meeting today in our session after fifteen months. The last session of the All-India Muslim League took place at Patna in December 1938. Since then many developments have taken place. I shall first shortly tell you what the All-India Muslim League had to face after the Patna session of 1938. You remember that one of the tasks, which was imposed on us and which is far from completed yet, was to organise Muslim Leagues all over India. We have made enormous progress during the last fifteen months in this direction. I am glad to inform you that we have established provincial leagues in every province. The next point is that in every bye-election to the Legislative Assemblies we had to fight with powerful opponents. I congratulate the Mussalmans for having shown enormous grit and spirit throughout our trials. There was not a single bye-election in which our opponents won against Muslim League candidates. In the last election to the U.P. Council, that is the Upper Chamber, the Muslim League's success was cent per cent. I do not want to weary you with details of what we have been able to do in the way of forging ahead in the direction of organising the Muslim League. But I may tell you that it is going up by leaps and bounds.
Next, you may remember that we appointed a committee of ladies at the Patna session. It is of very great importance to us, because I believe that it is absolutely essential for us to give every opportunity to our women to participate in our struggle of life and death. Women can do a great deal within their homes, even under purdah. We appointed this committee with a view to enable them to participate in the work of the League. The objects of this central committee were: (1) to organise provincial and district women's sub-committees under the provincial and district Muslim Leagues: (2) to enlist a larger number of women to the membership of the Muslim League: (3) to carryon an intensive propaganda amongst Muslim women throughout India in order to create in them a sense of a greater political consciousness -- because if political consciousness is awakened amongst our women, remember your children will not have much to worry about: (4) to advise and guide them in all such matters as mainly rest on them for the uplift of Muslim society. This central committee, I am glad to say, started its work seriously and earnestly. It has done a great deal of useful work. I have no doubt that when we come to deal with their report of work done we shall really feel grateful to them for all the services that they have rendered to the Muslm League.
We had many difficulties to face from January 1939 right up to the declaration of war. We had to face the Vidya Mandir in Nagpur. We had to face the Wardha Scheme all over India. We had to face ill-treatment and oppression to Muslims in the Congress-governed provinces. We had to face the treatment meted out to Muslims in some of the Indian States such as Jaipur and Bhavnagar. We had to face a vital issue that arose in that littlc state of Rajkot. Rajkot was the acid test made by the Congress which would have affected one-third of India. Thus the Muslim League had all along to face various issues from January 1939 up to the time of the declaration of war. Before the war was declared the grratcst danger to the Muslims of India was the possible inauguration of the federal scheme in the central Government. We know what machinations were going on. But the Muslim League was stoutly resisting them in every direction. We felt that we could never accept the dangerous scheme of the central federal Government embodied in the Government of India Act, 1935. I am sure that we have made no small contribution towards persuading the British Government to abandon the scheme of central federal government. In creating that [state of] mind in the British Government, the Muslim League, I have no doubt, played no small part. You know that the British people are very obdurate people. They are also very conservative; and although they are very clever, they are slow in understanding. After the war was declared, the Viceroy naturally wanted help from the Muslim League. It was only then that he realised that the Muslim League was a power. For it will be remembered that up to the time of the declaration of war, the Viceroy never thought of me but of Gandhi and Gandhi alone. I have been the leader of an important party in the Legislature for a considerable time, larger than the one I have the honour to lead at present, the present Muslim League Party in the Central Legislature. Yet the Viceroy never thought of me. Therefore, when I got this invitation from the Viceroy along with Mr. Gandhi, I wondered within myself why I was so suddenly promoted, and then I concluded that the answer was the 'All-India Muslim League' whose President I happen to be. I believe that was the worst shock that the Congress High Command received, because it challenged their sole authority to speak on behalf of India. And it is quite clear from the attitude of Mr. Gandhi and the High Command that they have not yet recovered from that shock. My point is that I want you to realise the value, the importance, the significance of organising ourselves. I will not say anything more on the subject.
But a great deal yet remains to be done. I am sure from what I can see and hear that the Muslim India is now conscious, is now awake, and the Muslim League has by now grown into such a strong institution that it cannot be destroyed by anybody, whoever he may happen to be. Men may come and men may go, but the League will live for ever.
Now, coming to the period after the declaration of war, our position was that we were between the devil and the deep sea. But I do not think that the devil or the deep sea is going to get away with it. Anyhow our position is this. We stand unequivocally for the freedom of India. But it must be freedom of all India and not freedom of one section or, worse still, of the Congress caucus -- and slavery of Mussalmans and other minorities.
Situated in India as we are, we naturally have our past experiences and particularly the experiences of the past 2 1/2  years of provincial constitution in the Congress-governed provinces. We have learnt many lessons. We are now, therefore, very apprehensive and can trust nobody. I think it is a wise rule for every one not to trust anybody too much. Sometimes we are led to trust people, but when we find in actual experience that our trust has been betrayed, surely that ought to be sufficient lesson for any man not to continue his trust in those who have betrayed him. Ladies and gentlemen, we never thought that the Congress High Command would have acted in the manner in which they actually did in the Congress-governed provinces. I never dreamt that they would ever come down so low as that. I never could believe that there would be a gentleman's agreement between the Congress and the Government to such an extent that although we cried [ourselves] hoarse, week in and week out, the Governors were supine and the Governor-General was helpless. We reminded them of their special responsibilities to us and to other minorities, and the solemn pledges they had given to us. But all that had become a dead letter. Fortunately, Providence came to our help, and that gentleman's, agreement was broken to pieces~and the Congress, thank Heaven, went out of office. I think they are regretting their resignations very much. Their bluff was called off [=was called]. So far so good. I therefore appeal to you, in all [the] seriousness that I can command, to organise yourselves in such a way that you may depend upon none except your own inherent strength. That is your only safeguard, and the best safeguard. Depend upon yourselves. That does not mean that we should have ill-will or malice towards others. In order to safeguard your rights and interests you must create that strength in yourselves [such] that you may be able to defend yourselves, That is all that I want to urge.
Now, what is our position with regard to [a] future constitution? It is that as soon as circumstances permit, or immediately after the war at the latest, the whole problem of India's future constitution must be examined de novo and the Act of 1935 must go once for all. We do not believe in asking the British Government to make declarations. These declarations are really of no use. You cannot possibly succeed in getting the British Government out of this country by asking them to make declarations. However, the Congress asked the Viceroy to make a declaration. The Viceroy said, 'I have made the declaration'. The Congress said, 'No, no. We want another kind of declaration. You must declare now and at once that India is free and independent with the right to frame its own constitution by a Constituent Assemhly to be elected on the basis of adult franchise or as low a franchise as possihle. This Assembly will of course satisfy the minorities' legitimate mterests." Mr. Gandhi says that if the minorities are not satisfied then he is willing that some tribunal of the highest character and most impartial should decide the dispute. Now, apart from the impracticable character of this proposal and quite apart from the fact that it is historically and constitutionally absurd to ask [a] ruling power to abdicate in favour of a Constituent Assembly. Apart from all that, suppose we do not agree as to the franchise according to which the Central Assembly is to be elected, or suppose the the solid body of Muslim representatives do not agree with the non-Muslim majority in the Constituent Assembly, what will happen? It is said that we have no right to disagree with regard to anything that this Assemhly may do in framing a national constitution of this huge sub-continent except those matters which may be germane to the safeguards for the minorities. So we are given the privilege to disagree only with regard to what may be called strictly safe-guards of the rights and interests of minorities. We are also given the privilege to send our own representatives by separate electorates. Now, this proposal is based on the assumption that as soon as this constitution comes into operation the British hand will disappear. Otherwise there will be no meaning in it. Of course, Mr. Gandhi says that the constitution will decide whether the British will disappear, and if so to what extent. In other words, his proposal comes to this: First, give me the declaration that we are a free and independent nation, then I will decide what I should give you back. Does Mr. Gandhi really want the complete independence of India when he talks like this? But whether the British disappear or not, it follows that extensive powers must be transferred to the people. In the event of there being a disagreement between the majority of the Constituent Assembly and the Mussalmans, in the first instance, who will appoint the tribunal? And suppose an agreed tribunal is possible and the award is made and the decision given, who will, may I know, be there to see that this award is implemented or carried out in accordance with the terms of that award? And who will see that it is honoured in practice, because, we are told, the British will have parted with their power mainly or completely? Then what will be the sanction behind the award which will enforce it? We come back to the same answer, the Hindu majority would do it; and will it be with the help of the British bayonet or the Gandhi's "Ahinsa"? Can we trust them any more? Besides, ladies and gentlemen, can you imagine that a question of this character, of social contract upon which the future constitution of India would be based, affecting 90 million of Mussalmans, can be decided by means of a judicial tribunal? Still, that is the proposal of the Congress.
Before I deal with what Mr. Gandhi said a few days ago I shall deal with the pronouncements of some of the other Congress leaders -- each one speaking with a different voice. Mr. Rajagopalacharya, the ex-Prime Minister of Madras, says that the only panacea for Hindu-Muslim unity is the joint electorates. That is his prescription as one of the great doctors of the Congress organisation. (Laughter.) Babu Rajendra Prasad, on the other hand, only a few days ago said, "Oh, what more do the Mussalmans want?" I will read to you his words. Referring to the minority question, he says: "If Britain would concede our right of self-determination, surely all these differences would disappear." How will our differences disappear? He does not explain or enlighten us about it.
"But so long as Britain remains and holds power, the differences would continue to exist. The Congress has made it clear that the future constitution would be framed not by the Congress alone but by representatives of all political parties and religious groups. The Congress has gone further and declared that the minorities can have their representatives elected for this purpose by separate electorates, though the Congress regards separate electorates as an evil. It will be representative of all the peoples of this country, irrespective of their religion and political affiliations, who will be deciding the future constitution of India, and not this or that party. What better guarantees can the minorities have?"
So according to Babu Rajendra Prasad, the moment we enter the Assembly we shall shed all our political affiliations, and religions, and everything else. This is what Babu Rajendra Prasad said as late as 18th March, 1940.
And this is now what Mr. Gandhi said on the 20th of March, 1940. He says: "To me,  Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Harijans, are all alike. I cannot be frivolous" -- but I think he is frivolous -- "I cannot be frivolous when I talk of Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah. He is my brother." The only difference is this that brother Gandhi has three votes and I have only one vote. (Laughter.) "I would be happy indeed if he could keep me in his pocket." I do not know really what to say of this latest offer of his. "There was a time when I could say that there was no Muslim whose confidence I did not enjoy. It is my misfortune that it is not so today." Why has he lost the confidence of the Muslims today? May I ask, ladies and gentlemen? "I do not read all that appears in the Urdu Press, but perhaps I get a lot of abuse there. I am not sorry for it. I still believe that without Hindu­Muslim settlement there can be no Swaraj." Mr. Gandhi has been saying this now for the last 20 years. "You will perhaps ask in that case why do I talk of a fight. I do so because it is to be a fight for a Constituent Assembly."
He is fighting the British. But may I point out to Mr. Gandhi and the Congress that you are fighting for a Constituent Assembly which the Muslims say they cannot accept; which, the Muslims say, means three to one; about which the Mussalmans say that they will never be able, in that way by the counting of head, to come to any agreenwnt which will be real agreement from the hearts, which will enable us to work as friends; and therefore this idea of a Constituent Assembly is objectionable, apart from other objections. But he is fighting for the Constituent Assembly, not fighting the Mussalmans at all! He says, "I do so because it is to be a fight for a Constituent Assembly. If Muslims who come to the Constituent Assembly" -- mark the words, "who come to the Constituent Assembly through Muslim votes" -- he is first forcing us to come to that Assembly, and then says -- "declare that there is nothing common between Hindus and Muslims, then alone I would give up all hope, but even then I would agree with them because they read the Quran and I have also studied something of that holy Book." (Laughter.)
So he wants the Constituent Assembly for the purpose of ascertaining the views of the Mussalmans; and if they do not agree then he will give up all hopes, but even then he will agree with us. (Laughter.) Well, I ask you. ladies and gentlemen, is this the way to show any real genuine desire, if there existed any, to come to a settlement with the Mussalmans? (Voices of no, no.) Why does not Mr. Gandhi agree, and.I have suggested to him more than once and I repeat it again from this platform, why does not Mr. Gandhi honestly now acknowledge that the Congress is a Hindu Congress, that he does not represent anybody except the solid body of Hindu people? Why should not Mr. Gandhi be proud to say. "I am a Hindu. Congress has solid Hindu backing"? I am not ashamed of saying that I am a Mussalman. (Hear, hear and applause.) I am right and I hope and I think even a blind man must have been convinced by now that the Muslim League has the solid backing of the Mussalmans of India (Hear, hear.) Why then all this camouflage? Why all these machinations? Why all these methods to coerce the British to overthrow the Mussalmans? Why this declaration of non-cooperation? Why this threat of civil disobedience? And why fight for a Constituent Assembly for the sake of ascertaining whether the Mussalmans agree or they do not agree? (Hear, hear.) Why not come as a Hindu leader proudly representing your people, and let me meet you proudly representing the Mussalmans? (Hear, hear and applause.) This all that I have to say so far as the Congress is concerned.
So far as the British Government is concerned, our negotiations are not concluded yet, as you know. We had asked for assurances on several points. At any rate, we have made some advance with regard to one point and that is this. You remember our demand was that the entire problem of [the] future constitution of India should be examined de novo, apart from the Government of India Act of 1935. To that the Viceroy's reply, with the authority of His Majesty's Government, was -- I had better quote that -- I will not put it in my own words: This is the reply that was sent to us on the 23rd of December. "My answer to your first question is that the declaration I made with the approval of His Majesty's Government on October the 13th last does not exclude -- Mark the words --  "does not exclude examination of any part either of the Act of 1935 or of the policy and plans on which it is based." (Hear, hear.)
As regards other matters, we are still negotiating and the most important points are: (1) that no declaration should be made by His Majesty's Government with regard to the future constitution of India without our approval and consent (Hear, hear, and applause) and that no settlement of any question should be made with any party behind our back (Hear, hear) unless our approval and consent is given to it. Well, ladies and gentlemen, whether the British Government in their wisdom agree to give us that assurance or not, but. I trust that they will still see that it is a fair and just demand when we say that we cannot leave the future fate and the destiny of 90 million of people in the hands of any other judge. --We and we alone wish to be the final arbiter. Surely that is a just demand. We do not want that the British Government should thrust upon the Mussalmans a constitution which they do not approve of and to which they do not agree. Therefore the British Government will be well advised to give that assurance and give the Mussalmans complete peace and confidence in this matter and win their friendship. But whether they do that or not, after all, as I told you before, we must depend on our own inherent strength; and I make it plain from this platform, that if any declaration is made, if any interim settlement is made without our approval and without our consent, the Mussalmans of India will resist it. (Hear, hear and applause.) And no mistake should be made on that score.
Then the next point was with regard to Palestine. We are told that endeavours, earnest endeavours, are being made to meet the reasonable, national demands, of the Arabs. Well, we cannot be satisfied by earnest endeavours, sincere endeavours, best endeavours. (Laughter.) We want that the British Government should in fact and actually meet the demands of the Arabs in Palestine. (Hear, hear.)
Then the next point was with regard to the sending of the troops. Here there is some misunderstanding. But anyhow we have made our position clear that we never intended, and in fact language does not justify it if there is any misapprehension or apprehension, that the Indian troops should not be used to the fullest in the defence of our own country. What we wanted the British Government to give us assurance of was that Indian troops should not be sent against any Muslim country or any Muslim power. (Hear, hear.) Let us hope that we may yet be able to get the British Government to clarify the position further.
This, then, is the position with regard to the British Government. The last meeting of the Working Committee had asked the Viceroy to reconsider his letter of the 23rd of December, having regard to what has been explained to him in pursuance of the resolution of the Working Committee dated the 3rd of February; and we are informed that the matter is receiving his careful consideration. Ladies and Gentlemen, that is where we stand after the War and up to the 3rd of February.
As far as our internal position is concerned, we have also been examining it, and you know. there are several schemes which have been sent by various well-informed constitutionalists and others who take interest with [=are interested in the] problem of India's future Constitution; and we have also appointed a sub­committee to examine the details of the schemes that have come in so far. But one thing is quite clear: it has always been taken for granted mistakenly that the Mussalmans are a minority, and of course we have got used to it for such a long time that these settled notions sometimes are very difficult to remove. The Mussalmans are not a minority. The Mussalmans are a nation by any definition. The British and particularly the Congress proceed on the hasis, "Well, you are a minority after all, what do you want!" "What else do the minorities want?" just as Babu Rajendra Prasad said. But surely the Mussalmans are not a minority. We find that even according to the British map of India we occupy large parts of this country where the Mussalmans are in a majority, such as Bengal, Punjab, N.W.F.P., Sind, and Baluchistan.
Now the question is, what is the solution of this prohlem between the Hindus and the Mussalmans? We have been considering, and as I have already said, a committee has been appointed to consider the various proposals. But whatever the final scheme of constitution, I will present to you my views, and I will just read to you in confirmation of what I am going  to put before you, a letter from Lala Lajpat Rai to Mr. C. R. Das. It was written, I believe, about 12 or 15 years ago, and that letter has been produced in a book recently published by one Indra Prakash, and that is how this letter has come to light. This is what Lala Lajpat Rai, a very astute politician and a staunch Hindu Mahasabite, said. But before I read his letter it is plain from [it] that you cannot get away from being a Hindu if you are a Hindu. (Laughter.) The word 'nationalist' has now become the play of conjurers in politics. This is what he says:
"There is one point more which has been troubling me very much of late and one [about] which I want you to think carefully and that is the question of Hindu-Muhammadan unity. I have devoted most of my time during the last six months to the study of Muslim history and Muslim law and I am inclined to think it is neither possible nor practicable. Assuming and admitting the sincerity of Mohammadan leaders in the non-cooperation movement I think their religion provides an effective bar to anything of the kind.
"You remember the conversation I reported to you in Calcutta which I had with Hakim Ajmal Khan and Dr. Kitchlew. There is no finer Muhammadan in Hindustan than Hakim Ajmal Khan, but can any Muslim leader over-ride the Quran? I can only hope that my reading of Islamic law is incorrect.
I think his reading is quite incorrect.
"And nothing would relieve me more than to be convinced that it is so. But if it is right then it comes to this, that although we can unite against the British we cannot do so to rule Hindustan on British lines. We cannot do so to rule Hindustan on democratic lines."
Ladies and gentlemen, when Lala Lajpat Rai said that we cannot rule this country on democratic lines it was all right; but when I had the temerity to speak the same truth about eighteen months ago, there was a shower of attacks and criticism. But Lala Lajpat Rai said fifteen years ago that we cannot do so -- viz., rule Hindustan on democratic lines. What is the remedy? The remedy, according to Congress, is to keep us in the minority and under the majority rule. Lala Lajpat Rai proceeds further:
"What is then the remedy? I am not afraid of the seven crores [=70 million] of Mussalmans. But I think the seven crores in Hindustan plus the armed hordes of Afghanistan, Central Asia, Arabia, Mesopotamia and Turkey, will be irresistible." (Laughter.)
"I do honestly and sincerely believe in the necessity or desirability of Hindu-Muslim unity. I am also fully prepared to trust the Muslim leaders. But what about the injunctions of the Koran and Hadis? The leaders cannot over-ride them. Are we then doomed? I hope not. I hope your learned mind and wise head will find some way out of this difficulty."
Now, ladies and gentlemen, that is merely a letter written by one great Hindu leader to another great Hindu leader fifteen years ago. Now, I should like to put before you my views on the subject as it strikes me, taking everything into consideration at the present moment. The British Govemment and Parliament, and more so the British nation, have been for many decades past brought up and nurtured with settled notions about India's future, based on developments in their own country which has built up the British constitution, functioning now through the Houses of Parliament and the system of [the] cabinet. Their concept of party government functioning on political planes has become the ideal with them as the best form. of government for every country, and the one-sided and powerful propaganda, which naturally appeals to the British, has led them into a serious blunder, in producing a constitution envisaged in the Government of India Act of 1935. We find that the most leading statesmen of Great Britain, saturated with these notions, have in their pronouncements seriously asserted and expressed a hope that the passage of time will harmonise the inconsistent elements in India.
A leading journal like the London Times, commenting on the Government of India Act of 1935, wrote that "Undoubtedly the difference between the Hindus and Muslims is not of religion in the strict sense of the word but also of law and culture, that they may be said indeed to represent two entirely distinct and separate civilisations. However, in the course of time the. superstitions will die out and India will be moulded into a single nation." (So according to the London Times the only difficulties are superstitions). These fundamental and deep-rooted differences, spiritual, economic, cultural, social, and political havc been euphemised as mere "superstitions." But surely it is a flagrant disregard of the past history of the sub-continent of India, as well as the fundamental Islamic conception of society vis-a-vis that of Hinduism, to characterise them as mere "superstitions." Notwithstanding [a] thousand years of close contact, nationalities which are as divergent today as ever, cannot at any time be expected to transform themselves into onc nation merely by means of subjecting them to a democratic constitution and holding them forcibly togdher by unnatural and artificial methods of British Parliamentary statutes. What the unitary government of India for one hundred fifty years had failcd to achieve cannot be realiscd by the imposition of a central federal government. It is inconceivable that the fiat or the writ of a government so constituted can ever command a willing and loyal obedience throughout the sub-continent by various nationalities, except by means of armed force behind it.
The problem in India is not of an inter-communal character, but manifestly of an international one, and it must be treated as such. So long as this basic and fundamental truth is not realised, any constitution that may be built will result in disaster and will prove destructive and harmful not only to the Mussalmans, but to the British and Hindus also. If the British Government are really in earnest and sincere to secure [the] peace and happiness of the people of this sub-continent, the only course open to us all is to allow the major nations separate homelands by dividing India into "autonomous national states." There is no reason why these states should be antagonistic to each other. On the other hand, the rivalry, and the natural desire and efforts on the part of one to dominate the social order and establish political supremacy over the other in the government of the country, will disappear. It will lead more towards natural goodwill by international pacts between them, and they can live in complete harmony with their neighbours. This will lead further to a friendly settlement all the more easily with regard to minorities, by reciprocal arrangements and adjustments between Muslim India and Hindu India, which will far more adequately and effectively safeguard the rights and interests of Muslim and various other minorities.
It is extremely difficult to appreciate why our Hindu friends fail to understand the real nature of Islam and Hinduism. They are not religions in the strict sense of the word, but are, in fact, different and distinct social orders; and it is a dream that the Hindus and Muslims can ever evolve a common nationality; and this misconception of one Indian nation has gone far beyond the limits and is the cause of more of our troubles and will lead India to destruction if we fail to revise our notions in time. The Hindus and Muslims belong to two different religious philosophies, social customs, and literature[s]. They neither intermarry nor interdine together, and indeed they belong to two different civilisations which are based mainly on conflicting ideas and conceptions. Their aspects [=perspectives?] on life, and of life, are different. It is quite clear that Hindus and Mussalmans derive their inspiration from different sources of history. They have different epics, their heroes are different, and different episode[s]. Very often the hero of one is a foe of the other, and likewise their victories and defeats overlap. To yoke together two such nations under a single state, one as a numerical minority and the other as a majority, must lead to growing discontent, and final. destruction of any fabric that may be so built up for the government of such a state.
History has presented to us many examples, such as the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. History has also shown to us many geographical tracts, much smaller than the sub-continent of India, which otherwise might have been called one country, but which have been divided into as many states as there are nations inhabiting them. [The] Balkan Peninsula comprises as many as seven or eight sovereign states. Likewise, the Portuguese and the Spanish stand divided in the Iberian Peninsula. Whereas under the plea of unity of India and one nation which does not exist, it is sought to pursue here the line of one central government, when we know that the history of the last twelve hundred years has failed to achieve unity and has witnessed, during these ages, India always divided into Hindu India and Muslim India. The present artificial unity of India dates back only to the British conquest and is maintained by the British bayonet, but the termination of the British regime, which is implicit in the recent declaration of His Majesty's Government, will be the herald of the entire break-up, with worse disaster than has ever taken place during the last one thousand years under the Muslims. Surely that is not the legacy which Britain would bequeath to India after one hundred fifty years of her rule, nor would Hindu and Muslim India risk such a sure catastrophe.
Muslim India cannot accept any constitution which must necessarily result in a Hindu majority government. Hindus and Muslims brought together under a democratic system forced upon the minorities can only mean Hindu Raj. Democracy of the kind with which the Congress High Command is enamoured would mean the complete destruction of what is most precious in Islam. We have had ample experience of the working of the provincial constitutions during the last two and a half years, and any repetItion of such a government must lead to civil war and [the] raising of private armies, as recommended by Mr. Gandhi to [the] Hindus of Sukkur when he said that they must defend themselves violently or non-violently, blow for blow, and if they could not they must emigrate
Mussalmans are not a minority as it is commonly known and understood. One has only got to look round. Even today, according to the British map of India, out of eleven provinces, four provinces where the Muslims dominate more or less, are functioning notwithstanding the decision of the Hindu Congress High Command to non-cooperate and prepare for civil disobedience. Mussalmans are a nation according to any defmition of a nation, and they must have their homelands, their territory, and their state. We wish to live in peace and harmony with our neighbours as a free and independent people. We wish our people to develop to the fullest our spiritual, cultural, economic, social, and political life, in a way that we think best and in consonance with our own ideals and according to the genius of our people. Honesty demands [that we find], and [the] vital interest[s] of millions of our people impose a sacred duty upon us to find, an honourable and peaceful solution, which would be just and fair to all. But at the same time we cannot be moved or diverted from our purpose and objective by threats or intimidations. We must be prepared to face all difficulties and consequences, make all the sacrifices that may be required of us, to achieve the goal we have set in front of us.
Ladies and gentlemen, that is the task before us. I fear I have gone beyond my time limit. There are many things that I should like to tell you, but I have already published a little pamphlet containing most of the things that I have said and I have been saying, and I think you can easily get that publication both in English and in Urdu from the League Office. It might give you a clearer idea of our aims. It contains very important resolutions of the Muslim League and various other statements. Anyhow, I have placed before you the task that lies ahead of us. Do you realise how big and stupendous it is? Do you realise that you cannot get freedom or independence by mere arguments? I should appeal to the intelligentsia. The intelligentsia in all countries in the world have been the pioneers of any movements for freedom. What does the Muslim intelligentsia propose to do? I may tell you that unless you get this into your blood, unless you are prepared to take off your coats and are willing to sacrifice all that you can and work selflessly, earnestly, and sincerely for your people, you will never realise your aim. Friends, I therefore want you to make up your mind definitely ,and then think of devices and organise your people, strengthen your organisation, and consolidate the Mussalmans all over India. I think that the masses are wide awake. They only want your guidance and your lead. Come forward as servants of Islam. organise the people economically, socially, educationally, and politically, and I am sure that you will be a power that will be accepted by everybody. (Cheers.)
This session of the All-India Muslim League. is one of the most critical that have taken place during its existence for the last more than thirty years.
The policy and the programme that you are called upon to formulate and lay down involves the fate and the future of the Musalmans of India and the country at large. On 12th April 1936, the Muslim League at its session, the first time in its history, undertook the policy and programme of mass contact. The League considered the prevailing conditions and surveyed the situation, as we had to face the forthcoming elections on the eve of the inauguration of the new Provincial Constitution embodied in the Government of India Act, 1935, and had no alternative but to enter the field and contest the elections to the Provincial Legislatures. It was also felt that there was no alternative but to utilise the Provincial Constitution for what it was worth, although it was far from being satisfactory. I may here reproduce the resolution that was passed on the 12th April, 1936:
"Whereas the Parliamentary System of Government which is being introduced in this country with the inauguration of the new Constitution presupposes the formation of parties with a well-defined policy and programme which facilitate the education of the electorate; and co-operation between groups with approximate aims and ideals and ensures the working of the Constitution to the best advantage; and whereas in order to strengthen the solidarity of the Muslim community and to secure for the Muslims their proper and effective share in the Provincial Governments, it is essential that the Muslims should organise themselves as one party, with an advanced and progressive programme, it is hereby resolved that the All­India Muslim League do take steps to contest the approaching Provincial elections, and for this purpose appoint Mr. Jinnah to form a Central Election Board under his Presidentship, consisting of not less than 35 membess, with powers to constitute affiliate Provincial Election Boards in various provinces, having regard to the conditions of each province, and devise ways and means for carrying out the aforesaid objects."
In pursuance of that decision, the Muslim League Central Parliamentary Board was established in June 1936, and also in various provinces Provincial Boards were established, to give effect to the resolution and the instructions of the League. It was not without difficulty, and it was no small task, to be performed in the absence of any previous preparations or any existing efficient organisation and machinery. It was a stupendous undertakmg to contest elections in all the provinces, especially when Musalmans all over India are numerically in a minority and weak, educationally backward, and economically nowhere.
There never had been made any systematic effort for their social and economic uplift. Whereas our sister communities have gone far ahead with their organisations, and the systematic programme supported by a large bulk of people, especially the Hindus, who are not only in a majority but better trained, more disciplined, and far better equipped educationally, economically, and financially.
But here I may mention that within a short time of about six months' work, before the elections were over, the results were very hopeful, and there is no need for us to despair. In each and every province where League Parliamentary Board was establlshed and the League parties were constituted, we carried away about 60 and 70 per cent of the seats that were contested by the League candidates; and since the elections were over I find that hundreds of District Leagues have been established in almost every province, from the farthest corner of Madras to the North-West Frontier Province. Since April last the Musalmans of India have rallied round the League more and more, and I feel confident that once they understand and realise the policy and programme of the Muslim League, the entire Musalman population of India will rally round its platform and under its flag.
The Muslim League stands for full national democratic self-government for India. A great deal of capital is made as to phrases more for the consumption of the ignorant and illiterate masses. Various phrases are used such as Purna Swaraj, self­government, complete independence, responsible government, substance of independence, and dominion status. There are some who talk of complete independence. But it is no use having complete independence on your lips and the Government of India Act, 1935, in your hands! Those who talk of complete independence the most, mean the least what it means.
Was the Gandhi-Irwin Pact in consonance with complete independence? Were the assurances that were required before the offices would be accepted and the Provincial Constitution could be worked, consistent with Purna Swaraj; and was the resolution after the assurance were refused, accepting offices and working the Provincial Constitution, enacted by the British Parliament and forced upon the people of India by the imperialistic power, in keeping with the policy and programme and the declarations of the Congress Party? Does wrecking mean working? These paper declarations, slogans, and shibboleths are not going to carry us anywhere. What India requires is a complete united front and honesty of purpose; and then by whatever name you may call your government is a matter of no consequence so long as it is a government of the people, by the people, for the people.
The present leadership of the Congress, especially during the last ten years, has been responsible for alienating the Musalmans of lndia more and more, by pursuing a policy which is exclusively Hindu; and since they have formed the Governments in six provinces where they are in a majority they have by their words, deeds, and programme shown more and more that the Musalmans cannot expect any justice or fair play at their hands. Whenever they are in majority and wherever it suited them, they refused to co-operate with the Muslim League Parties and demanded unconditional surrender and signing of their pledges.
The demand was insistent: abjure your party and forswear your policy and programme and liquidate [the] Muslim League; but where they found that they had not a majority, like the North-West Frontier Province, their sacred principle of collective responsibility disappeared, and promptly the Congress Party was allowed in that province to coalesce with any other group. That [=then (?)] any individual Musalman member who was willing to unconditionally surrender and sign their pledge was offered a job as a minister and was passed off as a Musalman minister, although he did not command the confidence or the respect of an overwhelming majority of the Musalman representatives in the legislature. These men are allowed to move about and pass off as Muslim ministers for the "loyal" services they have rendered to the Congress, by surrendering and signing the pledge unconditionally; and the degree of their reward is the extent of their perfidy. Hindi is to be the nationall language of all India, and the Bande Matram is to be the national song, and is to be forced upon all. The Congress flag is to be obeyed and revered by all and sundry.
On the very threshold of what little power and responsibility is given, the majority community have clearly shown their hand: that Hindustan is for the Hindus; only the Congress masquerades under the name of nationalism, whereas the Hindu Mahasabha does not mince words. The result of the present Congress Party policy will be, I venture to say, class bitterness, communal war, and strengthening of the imperialistic hold as a consequence. I dare say that the British Government will give the Congress a free hand in this direction, and it matters very little to them, nay, on the contrary, it is all to the good, so long as their interests, imperial or otherwise, are not touched, and the Defence remains intact; but I feel that a fearful reaction will set in when the Congress has created more and more divisions amongst Indians themselves, and made the united front impossible.
Here it will not be out of place to state that the responsibility of the British Government is no less in the disastrous consequences which issue [=ensue]. It has been clearly demonstrated that the Government and the Governor-General who have been given the powers and special responsibility to safeguard and protect the minorities--under the Constitution which was made so much of by Lord Zetland, the Secretary of State for India, during the controversy of [=over] the assurances demanded by the Congress Party--have failed to use them, and have thereby been a party, they have been a party to passing off men as Muslim ministers by appointing them as such, although they know full well that they do not command the confidence of the Muslim representatives or the public outside.
If in a matter like this, the Governors have shown their utter helplessness and disregard for their sacred obligations which were assumed by the British Government for the protection of minorities, could they or would they be able to afford protection in [a] hundred and one other matters which may not come up to the surface to be known, in the day-to-day working of the Legislatures and the administrative machinery? These are very serious and not worthy signs of the time. The one wholesome lesson that I ask the Musalmans to learn, before it is too late, is that the path before the Musalmans is, therefore, plain. They must realise that the time has come when they should concentrate and devote their energies to self-organisation and full development of their power, to the exclusion of every other consideration.
I have pointed out before that a section of Musalmans is divided, that there is a group that stands with face turned towards the British. If they have not learnt by now of the bitter consequences, they will never learn. God only helps those who help themselves.
There is another group which turns towards the Congress, and they do so because they have lost faith in themselves. I want the Musalmans to believe in themselves, and take their destiny in their own hands. We want men of faith and resolution who have the courage and determination, and who would fight single-handed for their convictions, though at the moment the whole world may be against them. We [must] develop power and strength, till the Musalmans are fully organised and have acquired that power and strength which must come from the solidarity and the unity of [the] people.
No settlement with the majority community is possible, as no Hindu leader speaking with any authority shows any concern or genuine desire for it. Honourable settlement can only be achieved between equals, and unless the two parties learn to respect and fear each other, there is no solid ground for any settlement. Offers of peace by the weaker party always mean confession of weakness, and an invitation to aggression. Appeals to patriotism, justice, and fair play, and for good will, fall flat. It does not require political wisdom to realise that all safeguards and settlements would be a scrap of paper, unless they are backed up by power. Politics means power, and not relying only on cries of justice or fair play or good will. Look at the nations of the world, and look at what is happening every day. See what has happened to Abyssinia; look at what is happening to China and Spain--and not to say [=not to speak] of the tragedy of Palestine to which I shall refer later.
The Congress High Command speaks in different voices. One opinion is that there is no such thing as [the] Hindu-Muslim question, and there is no such thing as [the] Minorities question, in the country. The other high opinion is that if a few crumbs are thrown to the Musalmans in their present disorganised and helpless state, you can manage them. They are sadly mistaken if they think that the Musalmans can be imposed upon. The All-India Muslim League has now come to live, and play its just part in the world of Indian politics; and the sooner [this] is realised and reckoned with, [the] better it will be for all interests concerned. The third opinion is that there is no light to be seen through the impenetrable darkness; but as the Congress goes on acquiring strength and power, so the past promises of the blank cheques remain unfilled and unsigned.
I want the Musalmans to ponder over the situation and decide their own fate by having one single, definite, uniform policy which should be loyally followed throughout India. The Congressite Musalmans are making a great mistake when they preach unconditional surrender. It is the height of [a] defeatist mentality to throw ourselves on the mercy and good will of others, and the highest act of perfidy to the Musalman community; and if that policy is adopted, let me tell you, the community will seal its doom and will cease to play its rightful part in the national life of the country and the Government.
Only one thing can save the Musalmans and energise them to regain their lost ground. They must first recapture their own souls, and stand by their lofty position and principles which form the basis of their great unity and which bind them in one body-politic. Do not be disturbed by the slogans and the taunts such as are used against the Musalmans--Communalists, toadies, and reactionaries. The worst today on earth, the most wicked communalist today amongst Muslims, when he surrenders unconditionally to the Congress and abuses his own community, becomes the nationalist of nationalists to­morrow! These terms and words and abuses are intended to create an inferiority complex amongst the Musalmans, and to demoralise them; and are intended to be sown in their midst and give us a bad name in the world abroad. This is the standard of propaganda which can only be treated with contempt.
The All-India Muslim League certainly and definitely stands to safeguard the rights and interests of the Musalmans and other minorities effectively. That is its basic and cardinal principle. This is the casus belli ['cause of war']. That is why the Muslim League and those who stand by it have incurred the displeasure of the Congress, for what [=why] else are we doing what the Congress objects to? They [=Muslim League supporters] are doing exactly what we decided two years ago. The League is not going to allow the Musalmans to be exploited either by the British Government or any other party or group, inside the legislatures or outside. The Congress with all its boasts has done nothing in the past for the Musalmans. It has failed to inspire confidence and to create a sense of security amongst the Musalmans and other minorities.
The Congress attempt, under the guise of establishing mass contact with the Musalmans, is calculated to divide and weaken and break the Musalmans, and is an effort to detach them from their accredited leaders. It is a dangerous move, and it cannot mislead anyone. All such manoeuvres will not succeed, notwithstanding the various blandishments, catchwords, and slogans. The only honest and straightforward course is to give the minorities a fair deal. All talk of the hunger and poverty is intended to lead the people towards socialistic and communistic ideas for which India is far from prepared.
The Muslim League in the present conditions considers the policy of direct action as suicidal and futile. Two such attempts have hitherto failed, and have entailed untold misery and suffer:ng to the people; and it had to be wound up after two decades of persistent efforts in that direction, with the result that a more reactionary Constitution is forced upon the people, and the Congress is working [under] it now.
To ask, by a resolution, the Governor-General to convey to the Secretary of State for India to call a constituent assembly on the basis of adult franchise, is the height of all ignorance. It shows lack of any sense of proportion. A constituent assembly can only be called by a sovereign authority and from the seat of power--a special body of men chosen as the representatives with the authority of the sovereign--to frame such constitution of the government of the country as they think proper, and their function ceases and the constitution so framed by them would automatically take the place and function as the constitution of the government of the country. Who is to constitute the electorates on the basis of adult franchise, and how many representatives will be chosen by these electorates constituted on the basis of adult franchise, and what will happen to the minorities in such constituencies, and what will the electorates understand, and how will they make their choice of this special body of men with final authority and power to frame the constitution of this great sub-continent? Who will direct the machinery to choose the special body of men with representative authority to frame such constitution as they may think proper? Who will set in motion the machinery? And, above all, what will happen to the minorities in such a body?
Is the Congress really serious that the Secretary of State is going to carry out all these requirements, when only a few days ago, the representative of the British Government speaking with the highest authority, His Excellency the Viceroy, said that he was full of hope that they might succeed in securing the federation of India in the near future, that when he came out to India he had expressed the hope that the scheme of federation was on the whole one calculated to secure federation within a reasonable time after the inauguration of provincial autonomy, and that his experience of the federation within a reasonable time? [[This last clause seems to be garbled.]]
Taking the country as a whole, the Congress is still far from occupying the seat of authority, and it is a travesty of realities to think of [the] British Government calling a constituent assembly; and [as] for the ability of the Congress to do so, [it] is pure moonshine. Let the Congress first bring all principal communities in the country and all principal classes of interest under its leadership. To ask the foreign Government, who is the ruling and sovereign authority in this country, to convene such a body before even the communal bodies in India have accepted the leadership of the Congress, is like putting the cart before the horse; and not to [=do not] forget that one-third of Indian India stands on [a] very special footing, constituting the Indian States and ruling Princes.
Instead of ploughing the sands, let the Congress at least concentrate and see that the all-India Federation scheme embodied in the Government of India Act, 1935, which is more reactionary than even the present Central Constitution, is not brought into being, as now it is so emphatically and confidently asserted by those who speak with authority on behalf of the British Government that it is soon going to be inaugurated. What is the Congress going to do? Do they think that they can single-handed as a party prevent it? Or will some other formula be evolved and the Congress quietly accept it as a fait accompli, as it had done the Provincial Constitution, in spite of all the rantings of some of the foremost leaders of the Congress against it?
May I now turn and refer to the question of Palestine. It has moved the Musalmans all over India most deeply. The whole policy of the British Government has been a betrayal of the Arabs from its very inception. Fullest advantage has been taken of their trusting nature. Great Britain has dishonoured her proclamation to the Arabs--which had guaranteed to them complete independence of the Arab homelands, and the formation of an Arab confederation--under the stress of the Great War. After having utilised them by giving them false promises, they installed themselves as the mandatory power with that infamous Balfour Declaration, which was obvioulsly irreconcilable and incapable of simultaneous execution; and having pursued the policy to find [a] national home for the Jews, Great Britain now proposes to partition Palestine; and the Royal Commission's recommendation completes the tragedy, and if given effect of [=to] must necessarily lead to the complete ruination and destruction of every legitimate aspiration of the Arabs in their homeland; and now we are asked to look at the realities.
But who created this situation? It has been the handiwork [of], and brought about sedulously by, the British statesmen. The League of Nations had, it seems, and let us hope, not approved of the Royal Commission's scheme, and a fresh examination may take place. But is it a real effort intended to give the Arabs their due? May I point out to Great Britain that this question of Palestine, if not fairly and squarely met, boldly and courageously decided, is going to be the turning point in the history of the British Empire. I am sure I am speaking not only of the Musalmans of India but of the world, and all sections of right thinking and fair-minded people will agree when I say that Great Britain will be digging its grave if she fails to honour her original proclamation, promises, and intentions--pre-war and even post-war--which were so unequivocally expressed to !he Arabs and the world at large.
I find that a very tense feeling of excitement has been created, and the British Governrnent, out of sheer desperation, are resorting to repressive measures and ruthlessly dealing with the public opinion of the Arabs in Palestine. The Muslims of India will stand solidly, and will help the Arabs in every way they can in their brave and just struggle that they are carrying on against all odds. May I send a message on behalf of the All-India Muslim League of cheer, courage, and determination in their just cause and struggle, which I am sure they will win through.
To the Musalmans of India in every province, in every district, in every tahsil, in every town, I say, your foremost duty is to formulate a constructive and ameliorative programme of work of [=for] the people's welfare, and to devise ways and means of social, economic, and political uplift of the Musalmans. We shall not hesitate to co-operate with any party or group in any practical and constructive programme for the welfare and advance of the provinces or the country. I entreat and implore that every man, woman, and child should rally round one common platform and flag of the All-India Muslim League. Enlist yourselves by hundreds and thousands, as quickly as you can, as members of the All-India Muslim League, Provincial Leagues, and District Leagues. Organise yourselves, establish your solidarity and complete unity. Equip yourselves, as trained and disciplined soldiers. Create the feeling of esprit de corps, and of comradeship amongst yourselves.
No individual or people can achieve anything without industry, suffering, and sacrifice. There are forces which may bully you, tyrannise over you, and intimidate you, and you may even have to suffer. But it is by going through this crucible of fire--persecution which may be levelled against you, tyranny that may be exercised, the threats and intimidations that may unnerve you--and it is by resisting, by overcoming, by facing these disadvantages [and] hardships, and by suffering and maintaining your true convictions and loyalty, that a nation will emerge worthy of its past glory and history, and will live to make the future history greater and more glorious not only of India but in the annals of the world.
Eighty millions of Musalmans in India have nothing to fear. They have their destiny in their hands, and as a well-knit, solid, organised, united force can face any danger; and withstand any opposition to its united front and wishes. There is the magic power in your own hands. Take your vital decisions--they may be grave and momentous and far-reaching in their consequences. Think [a] hundred times before you take any decision, but once a decision is taken, stand by it as one man. Be true and loyal, and I feel confident that success is with you.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In the first place, let me thank you and those who have made inquiries about my indisposition. I have received so many messages and cards that it is not possible for me to reply to them personally either by wire or letter. But I hope that you will accept my heartfelt thanks and appreciation for your inquiries about my health.
We have got to take stock of our internal progress and development of the organization of the All-India Muslim League. I think you will remember that the first foundation of the revival of the All-India Muslim League was laid down in April 1936 at Bombay, and it is now almost exactly five years. During the five years that have passed, and if I may call it our five-year plan, we have, I think it will be admitted by all hands, succeeded in organizing the Muslims of India from one end of India to the other in a remarkable manner. Since the fall of the Mogul Empire, I think I am right in saying that Muslim India was never so well organized and so alive and so politically conscious as it is today.
We have established a flag of our own, a national flag of Muslim India. We have established a remarkable platform that displays and demonstrates a complete unity of the entire solid body of Muslim India. We have defined in the clearest language our goal, about which Muslim India was groping in the dark, and the goal is Pakistan.
In this effort of ours, let me not forget to appreciate what South India has done. I know you had many difficulties in your progress. I have been in very close touch with almost all the important districts of yours, not personally but by means of post and telegrams. I have watched, and I have watched with pride and pleasure, the way in which you have organized the Muslim League in South India. Yours has been a real growth; a growth not from the top but from the bottom. Only about a year ago, you exploded the top and brought the Muslim League into complete harmony throughout your presidency. For this, many have worked hard, and I am in possession of reliable information. I believe I am not exaggerating to flatter you because I am in your presidency, but I am convinced that 7 percent of Muslims in this vast presidency have organized themselves under the banner of the Muslim League as no other province has done.
That is our five-year plan of the past. We have succeeded in raising the prestige of the League throughout this country; it has now reached even the farthest corners of the world. Now, what's next? You must remember that we are now at the most critical time. You must remember that there are various forces in India and outside. No people can ever succeed in anything they desire unless they work for it and work hard for it.
What is required now is that you should think, and I say particularly to you, delegates of the All-India Muslim League who have gathered here from all parts of India, we must now think and devise the program of another five-year plan. Part of the five-year plan should be how quickly and how best the departments of national life of Muslim India can be built up. What are those departments? Those are the four main pillars.
Let us devise a definite, well-considered educational plan. It was knowledge, information, and enlightenment that made a people great. Next, you know that Muslims are left behind both economically and in the social uplift of the people of this great land of ours. Muslims are at the bottom compared to other communities.
Consider this great province of Madras. May I know what state the Muslims have in the economic life of this province? Maybe my knowledge is very poor, but I have been inquiring since my arrival here, and I have inquired before also. I was told that only two industries in which the Muslims were anywhere were hides and skins and beedies—in other words, beedi sellers and matchstick sellers. I ask you, are you going to be beedi sellers or matchstick sellers, or are you going to play your part in the commerce and improvement of this presidency?
The next important thing was political training. While the Muslims had made remarkable progress in the sense that they had brought millions of Muslims under the banner of the Muslim flag, while they had become politically conscious, while they had come to feel that they had acquired their self-respect, self-reliance, and the dignity and honor of their nation, they required thorough harnessing, consolidating, and political training in a manner that would enable them to march along to their goal.
I want that there should be lieutenants, captains, majors, colonels, and generals, and just as there are soldiers in the army, we must have political soldiers. And these soldiers must be so well trained in political science that they could be prepared to face any emergency that might arise at any time.
Our decisions and our resolutions are misrepresented and misinterpreted. What is the goal of the Muslim League? What is the ideology of the All-India Muslim League? Let me tell you as clearly as I can. The goal of the All-India Muslim League is this: we want the establishment of completely independent states in the North Western and Eastern zones of India with full control of defense, foreign affairs, communication, customs, currency, exchange, etc. And we do not want under the circumstances a constitution of an all-India character, with one government at the center. We will never agree to that. If you once agree, let me tell you, the Muslims will be absolutely wiped out of existence.
We shall never be a signatory to any power or government at the center so far as the North Western and Eastern zones of our free national homes are concerned. The leadership of Hindu India, I regret to say, is being fooled and being bamboozled by the policy and diplomacy of the British Government, who are dangling in front of them a united all-India constitution and democracy—two carrots before donkeys.
I say to the Hindu leadership, you have lost the last shred of statesmanship if you do not realize this yet. The British Government knows that Muslim India will never submit to an all-India constitution with one central government, and the British statesmen know that as far as democracy, the parliamentary system of government, is concerned, it is nothing but a farce in this country.
It is not, as some people mix it up, a question of Muslims objecting to the government which should be based on the brotherhood of man, as it is often said by people who truly do not understand what they are talking about when they discuss democracy or when they talk about Islam. Democracy means, to begin with, majority rule. Majority rule in a single society is understandable, although even there it has failed. Representative government in a single nation, harmonious, homogeneous, and unified, is also understandable. But you only need to apply your mind for a few minutes to see the truth.
Can such a system ever work or succeed when you have two different nations, and indeed more than two different nations in this subcontinent, when you have two distinct societies—the Muslim society and the Hindu society? And in this land (South India), there is another nation, that is the Dravidian. This land is truly Dravidistan, and imagine if three percent of the Brahmin upper caste, through skillful maneuvering and electioneering, were to secure a majority. Is this democracy, or is this a farce?
Therefore, I have my full sympathy and my fullest support for the non-Brahmins, and I say to them: "The only way for you to live your own life is to live according to your own culture, language, and history. Thank God that Hindi did not gain a foothold here. Go ahead. I have every sympathy, and I shall do all I can, and you can establish Dravidistan, where seven percent of the Muslims will extend their hands of friendship and live with you in conditions of security, justice, and fairness."
Ladies and Gentlemen, in the first instance, let me again thank you for the honor you have done me in asking me to preside over your deliberations in this Conference of the Punjab Muslim Students Federation. As I said, I felt that it was a call from a kindred spirit, and I was only too glad to respond to that call. Next, I have been with you since the 1st of March, that is yesterday, and I have also watched your organization of this Conference and your deliberations. Let me most heartily congratulate you for the way in which you have organized this Conference. I also wish to convey, not only to the young men here but to a large body of Muslims in Lahore and those who have come from different parts, that I really appreciate and feel happy that the Muslims in Punjab are now awake, and that there is a small band of young men who have tried very hard to organize this Conference of the Punjab Muslim Students Federation. But, I think those who have worked for it, those who have labored for it, must have the fullest satisfaction that their labors have borne fruit, and they are fully rewarded for their work. Members of the Punjab Muslim Students Federation and ladies and gentlemen, let me in the first instance, as the President of the Muslim League, give you some account as short as possible of the work that the All-India Muslim League has done during the last three years. The Muslim League, as you know, was in a moribund state in 1936 and the Muslims were dead.
Bringing the last three years, the Muslim League has organized the Muslims all over India to such an extent that it has been a matter not only of admiration but astonishment to those who are friends and those who are opponents. It is a remarkable thing, when the history comes to be written, how within these three years the bulk of 90 million Muslims rallied round one platform and under one flag, a thing that you have never known in the history of the Muslims for the last 200 years. It seems almost like a miracle that such a thing could have happened. All our enemies, all our opponents were fully confident and hoped in the idea that the Muslims will never unite, that they will quarrel; and in that hope, their mission was to incite and cause disruptions and divisions amongst the Muslims. Today, let me tell you that they have now given up the efforts to create division and disruption amongst the Muslims. I take only the latest instance of the Rohilkhand constituency seat for the Central Assembly. They were told that it was the Congress hold, the Hindu hold, and that the last member who was elected was a Muslim but a Congressite Muslim. Well, I never indulge in a language that would in any way convey that I take delight in the misfortune of anybody. The gentleman who was occupying the seat from the Rohilkhand constituency, I suppose, could not help obeying the High Command and had to perform individual satyagraha, and as a result, he was made the guest of His Majesty's Home (laughter) for more than one year, and as a consequence which follows, I mean the legal consequence, he was unseated. But when we put up our candidate, Nawabzada Liaqat Ali Khan, there was no Congressite to be seen either on the land or on the horizon. That is only one instance, and there are many. But let us see what the Muslim League has done.
I believe I am correctly stating that today the Muslim League has elevated the Muslims of India to a position of dignity; it has elevated the Muslims of India to an honorable place in the affairs of this country and in the national life of this country. It has instilled in Muslims, both in rank and file, a spirit of discipline. It has granted the Muslims the much-needed self-respect and self-reliance. It has provided Muslim India with an accurate depiction, mirrored before you, a correct perspective of the critical issues that are currently impacting the Muslim nation. Therefore, it has elevated the prestige and reputation of the Muslims of India to an extent that has surpassed expectations—my expectations and those of many of us. Today, Muslim India is liberated from the clutches of bureaucracy. Those individuals who were imposed upon the Muslims as leaders and who paraded as leaders of the Muslims but were inherently aligned with the bureaucratic camp have become powerless. Those individuals who used to proudly wear the Gandhi cap on the Congress platform are now helpless and incapable of making any impact. The Muslims have reclaimed their rightful place. They have united around their own platform and under their own flag, and they are committed to pursuing their policies to achieve the goals we have set for ourselves. However, there is still much more to accomplish, and therefore, my appeal to you—whether young or old, men or women—is that we must continue to work.
Remember, you have to achieve, in the first instance, the goal: that you want Muslim India to be under our government. You have to achieve that, and achieving it cannot be accomplished merely by passing resolutions. You understand what this means. Certainly, we have proclaimed on numerous platforms that we are not a minority. That's correct—we are not a minority. Though it pains me to say this, Hindu leadership is still clinging to the outdated notion that we are a minority, and they claim to be willing to provide safeguards based on principles outlined by the League of Nations. Today, I read a formula from a prominent Hindu leader who spoke at the Hindu Minorities Conference happening in this city yesterday. Let me tell my Hindu friends and leaders that the League of Nations is no longer relevant. Do you not know this? Let me enlighten you. You're living at least twenty-five years in the past. Moreover, you fail to recognize that the global landscape is evolving rapidly, week by week and month by month, particularly in the European and other battlefronts. Can this conservative and exclusive community not adapt, modernize, and shift its intentions and perspectives?
Yet, it's as clear as day that we are not a minority; we are a nation. And a nation requires a territory. What good is it to assert that we are a nation? A nation does not exist in the abstract; it resides on land, must govern that land, and needs a territorial state—exactly what you aim to achieve. Keep in mind, it's not a small endeavor. This is the most significant undertaking you've ever embarked upon in your life since the decline of the Mughal Empire. You understand that this goal demands all the necessary components and preparation to be realized. Please allow me to advise you: do not get carried away by sentiments, do not be swayed by slogans. How is a nation formed? And when it has faltered, how is it revived? These are the crucial questions to consider.
We fall into the category of the fallen. We've witnessed the darkest days, though I am heartened by the distinct and definitive revival and renaissance of the Muslim nation in this country. Thus, we now find ourselves in a specific position. We're awakening. Our eyes are just beginning to open. We've gained that awareness as we look around. Yet, you are still an unwell individual; you remain an invalid. You must traverse the convalescent phase before you can become entirely healthy, robust, and active. How do you bring your people to that stage of preparedness when you can achieve your goal? There is no effortless path. My young friends, first and foremost, you must engage in the nation-building aspects. You may wonder, what does that entail? What are these nation-building aspects? Allow me to elaborate on them. You can observe that there are at least three essential pillars that contribute to making a nation deserving of possessing a territory and governing its people. One is education. Without education, you find yourself in the same position as we were in this gathering last night—in darkness. With education, you'll be in the same position as you are in this broad daylight.
Additionally, no nation and no populace can achieve much without becoming economically robust in commerce, trade, and industry. Lastly, once you've gained the light of knowledge through education and have made yourselves economically, commercially, and industrially strong, you must prepare yourselves for defense—defense against external threats and the maintenance of internal security. Hence, these three main pillars form the foundation of a nation, and the strength of the nation is directly related to your readiness and preparedness concerning these pillars.
Today, you stand at the lower rungs of the ladder in these three key areas. Educationally, there's a substantial gap to bridge. Economically and financially, Muslims across India are struggling, on the brink of bankruptcy. Even in terms of defense, the Muslims are notably underrepresented despite the limited opportunities under the present governmental system. Therefore, my young friends, I observe that you have a set of resolutions—commendable resolutions indeed. You aim to address some of these issues with your community. Here's a program for you: don't merely speak in a language of bravado or arrogance. I am convinced that we have no need for such talk, nor do we need to resort to threats. Why? First and foremost, our cause is honest, just, and right. That's the initial reason. The second reason is that those who are strong and those who possess self-confidence and self-reliance do not need to engage in unnecessary threats or use arrogant language.
Let us, therefore, try as far as possible to reason and persuade our opponents. Of course, I understand that our reasoning and persuasion do not always succeed, but we must exert every possible effort. Let us not cultivate unnecessary bitterness against those who currently oppose this Lahore Pakistan resolution. Why should we? I am confident that these opponents of ours will eventually recognize that this is the only and best solution for India's immensely complex problem—a problem that stands without parallel in the world. Whether they are our opponents, the British Government, the Indian princes, or the Hindus—all these significant and essential elements within the Indian subcontinent—will eventually realize that what we are stating is the sole solution. I will explain why later on. Therefore, I do not wish to deviate from my point. If you wish to achieve your goal in the shortest and most efficient manner, then lay the foundations of your nation in the manner I have described.
The next point I wish to convey, ladies and gentlemen, is this: we are faced with two questions. One pertains to the present, and the other pertains to the future. As far as the present is concerned, let me inform you of the stance of the Muslim League. You are aware that a major conflict is occurring on more than one continent across the world. The British Government is significantly involved in this war. Rightly or wrongly, based on the current situation and the constitution under which we are governed, India is a belligerent nation. India, at this moment, is under British rule. Consequently, India is implicated in this war effort. Therefore, India must contribute all its possible efforts to intensify its war endeavor. No matter what our grievances and complaints against the British Government might be, we recognize that India is also in jeopardy. Regardless of your personal sentiments and emotions, you cannot disregard the central fact that India is also facing danger. For our own interests, we cannot obstruct the war efforts being made to strengthen and enhance India's defense.
We also do not wish to cause any hindrance to Great Britain. I am not advocating on behalf of the British Government, nor am I swayed by sentimental or emotional factors. With this in mind, the Muslim League was prepared to support and wholeheartedly cooperate with the British Government, provided that along with taking on the burden and responsibility, we were also granted real and substantial authority within the existing constitutional framework. We asserted that Muslim League representatives must possess genuine and significant authority within the Government both at the central and provincial levels, to genuinely and effectively contribute. How can we bear the responsibility and burden concerning the disposition of our people when we lack a voice in the Government and cannot participate in the decision-making about our army? How can we bear the responsibility and burden of managing millions and crores when we have no say and no share in the authority responsible for spending that money? How are we supposed to take up and fulfill that responsibility without the power and control within the Government? The principle was even acknowledged by the British Government, and it's not disputed. However, when it came to implementation, Lord Linlithgow or Mr. Amery—or perhaps both, I am uncertain—came forward with a trivial gesture, saying, "We will give you two seats in the Executive Council," without offering any further details (Laughter). This proposal, from its very inception, negated the principle and trivialized the substantial and wise foundation that had been laid down. As you are aware, this offer could not be accepted by any responsible organization and was consequently rejected by the All-India Muslim League.
That is all about the present. Now, let's move to the future. Regarding the future, ladies and gentlemen, I have sincerely endeavored to give thorough attention, devoid of any bias or prejudice, and to the best of my ability, I have examined the arguments against the Lahore resolution. As far as we are concerned, we stand by the Lahore resolution and we want it to be realized as soon as circumstances permit, or immediately after the war. That's our desire. Our demand is not directed at Hindus, as the Hindus did not encompass the entirety of India. Muslims were the ones who ruled over India for 700 years. It was the British who took India from the Muslims. Hence, we are not asking Hindus to concede anything to us. Our demand is addressed to the British, who are in control. It is utterly nonsensical to claim that Hindustan belongs solely to Hindus. They also assert that "Muslims were Hindus at one time." These baseless arguments are presented by their leaders. They propose, for instance, that if an Englishman converts to Islam in England, he does not demand Pakistan. Do you not have eyes to observe and minds to comprehend that an Englishman, upon changing his faith, remains part of the same society with the same culture and social life? Everything remains consistent when an Englishman alters his religion. But can you not recognize that a Muslim, when converted—even if it occurred more than a thousand years ago—according to your Hindu religion and philosophy, becomes an outcaste and untouchable, and Hindus cease to engage with him socially, religiously, culturally, or in any other aspect? He belongs to a distinct and separate order, not just religiously, but socially, living in an entirely different and opposing social order, religiously, socially, and culturally. It has been over a thousand years that the majority of Muslims have lived within a distinct world, a different society, a different philosophy, and a different faith. How can you compare this with the nonsensical notion that merely changing faith does not warrant a demand for Pakistan? Can you not see the fundamental difference?
Therefore, I truly believe that no honest individual can feasibly contest the fact that Muslims constitute a separate nation, distinctly distinct from Hindus. There are numerous Hindus who genuinely believe this, who have approached me and frequently expressed that the Lahore resolution is the only viable solution. Hence, it is futile to argue this point any further.
However, how is the propaganda against it conducted? The propaganda is perpetuated, and as I have mentioned, I have endeavored to understand the arguments against it without any bias, to the extent humanly possible. What are these arguments? I'll begin with Mr. Gandhi. He claims that it constitutes the vivisection of India. The term itself evokes a sense of horror. Is it meant to frighten Muslims away from committing the vivisection of India? Or is it intended to scare Hindus by suggesting that these unfortunate Muslims are vivisecting their motherland? Here's a question that arises from various queries. Can you tell me when India was ever truly unified? Was it ever united as one entity? Why invoke the term "vivisection"? His disciple, Mr. Rajagopalacharya, takes it a step further and asserts—starting by stating that it's like cutting a baby in two. To him, I say, "My dear fellow, where is this baby that is to be divided?" He wasn't content with that, and he thought it wasn't sufficient, so he went further, claiming that when two Hindu brothers quarrel, one desires to slice the mother cow into two halves.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I've always held profound respect for the religious sentiments of any community. However, if a prominent politician of Mr. Rajagopalacharya's stature could undermine the feelings, the religious feelings of Hindus, by utilizing this analogy that I intended to cut the mother cow in two, it can only be described as a desperate attempt on their part when they lack any other compelling argument to present. Then we were told that it goes against Islam!
Ladies and gentlemen, I am not a learned Maulana or Maulvi. I do not profess to possess expertise in theology. However, I do possess some understanding of my faith, and I am a modest yet proud adherent of my beliefs. I implore you, in the name of all that is sacred, how can this Lahore resolution be deemed contrary to Islam? In what way is it against Islam? This argument has been put forth, once again, by a person of no lesser stature than Mr. Rajagopalacharya.
Next, we are informed that it is not in the best interests of Muslims themselves. To my Hindu friends, I say, kindly do not concern yourselves with us. We sincerely thank you for highlighting what you perceive as our mistake and unwise decision and for telling us that it does not align with our interests. We are prepared to bear the consequences of our well-thought-out resolution. Please take care of your own concerns.
The following argument contends that the plan is economically impractical. I have been observing, and I assure you, I've made an effort to read anything uttered by Hindu leaders anywhere—though I may have missed something—I haven't come across any assertion except for the slogans that suggest that economically, it is not a viable proposition. This is due to the claim that Punjab is in financial ruin, as is Sind, Baluchistan is in a dire state, and the North-West Frontier Province is also in financial disarray. Thus, economically, it's deemed unworkable. But why? Can't you see that presently, the primary source of revenue—most of the revenue for this entire region—rests with the Central Government? In the event of a partition, in the presence of independent zones as we've defined, those regions would directly receive their own revenue without it passing through the central government, as there would be no central government for India. Why should this be a concern for you? In the worst-case scenario, as any rational person would, we will manage our resources within our means.
Furthermore, what about the Hindu minorities in Muslim zones? What about them? What are your suggestions? They do not offer any suggestions. And what about the Muslim minority in Hindu zones? As for that, I have made a proposal. I propose that the Hindu minority in Muslim zones must be safeguarded fully as a minority. Similarly, the Muslim minority in Hindu zones should be fully protected as a minority. What do you suggest? Do you suggest, as an argument, that because the Hindu minorities in Muslim zones will remain as minorities, the 90 million Muslims should continue to be a minority in an artificial "united India" with a centralized government, so that you can exert control over them, even in zones where they constitute a solid majority? This is a nonsensical and misleading argument that is occasionally brought up.
Then we are told—and this is not frequently mentioned—that if India is divided, then Muslims will dominate the entire country, and Hindus will not be safe. My dear friends, there will be at least 200 million Hindus in India, if not more, whereas the Muslims in the North-West zone and the Eastern zone combined will not exceed 70 million. Are you truly apprehensive that these 70 million Muslims, when allowed to function and develop freely and independently in their own homelands, according to their own values, laws, culture, social life, and religion, will somehow overrun the entire country? Then, may I pose this question: How will you prevent the perceived threat of these 90 million Muslims running over the entire nation by maintaining a paper constitution of a united India? Do you desire a paper constitution of united India while harboring 90 million—shall I say—potentially "dangerous" individuals? Is it your wish that the British Government police a Hindu-dominated India, allowing you to gradually and insidiously oppress the Muslims with the assistance of British bayonets? Is that what you truly desire? I ask my Hindu friends and their leaders, can you even conceive that the British people and the British nation would lower themselves to such an extent as to remain here and police your rule, allowing you to suppress the Muslims in this country through their bayonets? What is it that you truly desire? That is the question.
So, I say, if Hindus truly desire peace, please scrutinize our proposals with objectivity and honesty. Discard these slogans, catchphrases, and dramatic gestures; they will not lead you anywhere. Let us then calmly assess this situation, acting as pragmatic individuals, taking into account historical contexts and the various constitutions observed in different nations. I am convinced that partition would indeed be in the best interests of all parties involved—not just Muslims, but Hindus, ruling Princes, and even the British.
Now, having examined almost every argument that has been put forth thus far, if we can reach an agreement on the partition of India, let me assure you, and I firmly believe—backed by reason—that Muslims and Hindus will coexist peacefully as friendly neighbors. I assure you, and it seems self-evident to me, that Muslim India will serve as the protective barrier for India's frontiers.
Do you believe for even a moment that Afghanistan would allow Iran to govern its territory? Do you think that Afghanistan or Iran would permit Turkey to rule over them? And do you think, even within a relatively small region like Arabia—comprising sovereign states like Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and others—that any of them would relinquish their independent territorial governance in favor of another? Why must you assume that once Muslims establish their own sovereign state in the North-West zone, someone else will be permitted to come and govern us, as if they must rule over me before they rule over Hindu India?
Hence, Muslim India will safeguard the frontiers, and I hope that Hindus will do the same for South and Western India. Together, we shall stand as good friends and neighbors, proclaiming to the world, "Hands off India." This moment offers India an opportunity that, if missed, might not arise again for a long time. Let us be practical, confront realities, and unite our efforts to find a solution to this predicament in line with the concept of Pakistan.
It is futile to threaten people or claim that the term "Pakistan" is being misused by certain individuals. Every intelligent person in this nation comprehends and grasps the essence of what we intend when we mention Pakistan. If there is any troublemaker aiming to cause unrest, only divine intervention can prevent them—I cannot. Anyone with intelligence and honesty understands exactly what we mean by "Pakistan": we are referring to the Lahore resolution.
There is one more matter I would like to address, and that concerns the Sikh community. Ladies and gentlemen, it is somewhat perplexing to understand why some of our Sikh friends harbor fears and concerns. I urge them to carefully and calmly consider this proposal. The position of the Sikh community will be significantly better in the scenario we are suggesting—the Lahore resolution—than their position in a united India under a federal constitution. Isn't it evident that Sikhs will form a significant community in the Punjab? As an important community in the Punjab, won't they play a substantial role in the affairs of the province within any legislature established for Punjab as one of the units of Pakistan? Won't they similarly contribute in the Pakistan federation as a vital community within the province?
What will their position be in the united India's federal constitution? They will be a mere fraction. This is true even today. Let me convey to my Sikh friends that even within the current Legislature, Sikhs hold little sway. What impact can one member have among a hundred? How will one member fare when there are 350 members, and you have only two or three? In a united India framework, not only will you have minimal representation, but you will be insignificantly small within a vast arrangement.
My Sikh friends cannot escape the inescapable reality that they are a minority in the Punjab and will continue to be one. Quarreling, threats, or intimidation cannot overturn the fundamental fact that Muslims constitute a majority in this region. I want to inform my Sikh friends that if I believe their fears and apply them to my presidency, then according to their concerns, my position in my presidency—where Muslims are merely 8% and the remaining nearly 90% are Hindus—would be a hundred times worse. Despite this, I am not afraid. Thus, I implore people to genuinely assess these facts and weigh their pros and cons.
There is one final point I would like to emphasize. It is evident that no federal constitution has ever been formulated or enacted without the voluntary agreement and consent of the constituent units entering into the federal arrangement. The only enduring solution for the Muslims of India, one that can withstand the test of time, is the partition of India. This partition would allow both communities to develop freely and comprehensively according to their respective strengths, economically, socially, culturally, and politically. Our struggle aims for the fullest opportunities and for the expression of the Muslim national will. This critical contest in which we are engaged pertains not solely to material gain but also to the very essence of the Muslim nation's existence. This is why I have repeatedly stated that this is a matter of life and death for the Muslims and is not open to negotiation or bargaining.
Muslims have grown acutely aware of this reality. If we lose in this struggle, everything is lost. Let our motto be as the Dutch proverb says: "Money is lost, nothing is lost; Courage is lost, much is lost; Honor is lost, most is lost; Soul is lost, all is lost."